README.md, before:

# cargo-anatomy
<p align="center">
  <!-- crates.io cannot resolve relative paths for images, so we use an absolute URL (FQDN) -->
  <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cutsea110/cargo-anatomy/main/logo.svg" alt="Cargo Anatomy Logo" width="200" />
</p>

[![Rust CI](https://github.com/cutsea110/cargo-anatomy/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/cutsea110/cargo-anatomy/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
[![Crates.io](https://img.shields.io/crates/v/cargo-anatomy.svg)](https://crates.io/crates/cargo-anatomy)
[![Crates.io Downloads](https://img.shields.io/crates/d/cargo-anatomy.svg?label=Crates.io&logo=rust)](https://crates.io/crates/cargo-anatomy)
[![Docker Cloud Build Status](https://img.shields.io/docker/pulls/cutsea110/cargo-anatomy?label=cargo-anatomy&logo=docker)](https://hub.docker.com/repository/docker/cutsea110/cargo-anatomy/general)

`cargo-anatomy` analyzes Rust workspaces and calculates metrics inspired by Robert C. Martin's package metrics. Each crate inside the workspace is treated as a package.

## Installation

```
cargo install cargo-anatomy
```

## Metrics

- **N** — number of classes in the crate (`struct`, `enum`, `trait` and `type` definitions).
- **R** — number of internal class relationships. Each unique reference from one class to another within the same crate counts once.
- **H** — relational cohesion: `H = (R + 1) / N`.
- **Ca** — afferent coupling: the number of external classes that depend on types from this crate.
- **Ce** — efferent coupling: the number of classes in this crate that depend on types from other crates in the workspace.
- **A** — abstraction: ratio of abstract classes (traits) to total classes, `A = abstract_classes / N`.
- **I** — instability: `I = Ce / (Ce + Ca)`.
- **D** — distance from the main sequence: `D = |A + I - 1| / sqrt(2)`.
- **D'** — normalized distance from the main sequence: `D' = |A + I - 1|`.

## Evaluation
Each metric is also mapped to a qualitative label. These labels are assigned using the following thresholds:

- **A (abstraction)**: ≥ 0.7 is `abstract`, ≤ 0.3 is `concrete`, otherwise `mixed`.
- **H (cohesion)**: > 1.0 is `high`, otherwise `low`.
- **I (instability)**: ≥ 0.7 is `unstable`, ≤ 0.3 is `stable`, otherwise `moderate`.
- **D' (normalized distance)**:
  - ≤ 0.4 → `good`.
  - ≥ 0.6 → `useless` if `A + I - 1 ≥ 0`, otherwise `painful`.
  - otherwise `balanced`.
`cargo-anatomy` also reports the list of classes discovered in each crate and detailed dependency graphs when invoked with the `-a` flag.

## Usage

```bash
# Run on the current workspace
cargo anatomy

# Analyze a specific manifest
cargo anatomy --manifest-path path/to/Cargo.toml

# Show detailed class and dependency information
cargo anatomy -a

# Include external dependencies in metrics (may be slower)
cargo anatomy -x

# Use a custom evaluation config generated by `cargo anatomy init` below
cargo anatomy -c config.toml

# Generate a template config file which you can modify and use with `-c`
cargo anatomy init

# Display help with metric descriptions
cargo anatomy -?

# Show version
cargo anatomy -V

# Output in YAML format
cargo anatomy -o yaml
# Output in Graphviz DOT format
cargo anatomy -o dot
# Output in Mermaid format
cargo anatomy -o mermaid

# Fail if metrics violate thresholds (experimental)
cargo anatomy --h-lt 1.1 --d-prime-ge 0.9
```

For custom evaluation thresholds, run `cargo anatomy init` to generate a
template configuration and pass `-c <FILE>` to load it. See the [Configuration](#configuration) section for more details.

The command outputs metrics for every member crate in compact JSON format by default. Use `-x` to also analyze external dependencies. Analyzing external crates can significantly increase processing time. When the `-a` flag is used, each crate also includes a `details.kind` field indicating whether it is part of the workspace or an external crate. Pipe to `jq` if you want it pretty printed. Use `-o yaml` for YAML output, `-o dot` for Graphviz or `-o mermaid` for Mermaid diagrams. When using `-o dot`, you can write the graph to a file and convert it with Graphviz: `cargo anatomy -o dot > graph.dot && dot -Tpng graph.dot -o graph.png`. Dependency arrows are labeled with the efferent couple count from the source crate when the `-a` flag is used. Graphviz and Mermaid diagrams can include individual type nodes when `--show-types-crates=<CRATE1,CRATE2>` is specified. Mermaid will only render the first 500 edges by default, so increase `maxEdges` in your [Mermaid configuration](https://mermaid.js.org/config/schema-docs/config.html#maxedges) if your graph is larger. Both Graphviz and Mermaid outputs omit dependency edges unless `-a` is supplied, so combining these formats with `-a` is recommended when you want to visualize the graph.
Use `--show-types-crates-all` to expand all workspace crates with type details (experimental).

### Analyzing macro-generated code

`cargo-anatomy` only sees the code that exists in your source files. Dependencies
introduced by macros are not visible unless you expand them first. You can use
[`cargo expand`](https://github.com/dtolnay/cargo-expand) to generate expanded
sources and analyze those instead.

```bash
# Install cargo-expand if you don't have it
cargo install cargo-expand

# Produce expanded sources for a crate
cargo expand -p my_crate --lib > /tmp/my_crate/src/lib.rs
cp my_crate/Cargo.toml /tmp/my_crate/

# Run cargo-anatomy on the expanded copy
cargo anatomy --manifest-path /tmp/my_crate/Cargo.toml
```

Repeat these steps for any crates that rely heavily on macros to ensure
macro-generated types are included in the analysis.

See [docs/output-schema.md](https://github.com/cutsea110/cargo-anatomy/blob/main/docs/output-schema.md) for a description of the output schema. Example output (`| jq`):

```json
{
  "meta": {
  "cargo-anatomy": { "version": "0.6.0", "target": "linux/x86_64" },
    "config": {
      "evaluation": {
        "abstraction": { "abstract_min": 0.7, "concrete_max": 0.3 },
        "cohesion": { "high_gt": 1.0 },
        "instability": { "unstable_min": 0.7, "stable_max": 0.3 },
        "distance": { "good_max": 0.4, "bad_min": 0.6 }
      }
    }
  },
  "crates": [
    {
      "crate_name": "my_crate",
      "metrics": {
        "n": 3,
        "r": 1,
        "h": 0.67,
        "ca": 0,
        "ce": 1,
        "a": 0.33,
        "i": 1.0,
        "d": 0.24,
        "d_prime": 0.34
      },
      "evaluation": {
        "a": "mixed",
        "h": "low",
        "i": "unstable",
        "d_prime": "good"
      },
      "details": {
        "kind": "Workspace",
        "classes": [
          { "name": "Foo", "kind": "Struct" },
          { "name": "Bar", "kind": "Struct" },
          { "name": "MyTrait", "kind": "Trait" }
        ]
      }
    }
  ],
  "warnings": {
    "dependency_cycles": []
  }
}
```

Enable `RUST_LOG=info` to see progress logs during analysis.

## Configuration

`cargo-anatomy` looks for a `.anatomy.toml` file at the workspace root to customize how metric values are evaluated. Run `cargo anatomy init` to create a template `.anatomy.toml` in the current directory. Pass `-c <FILE>` to use a different configuration. The file is written in TOML and contains the following sections and defaults:

```toml
[evaluation]
  [evaluation.abstraction]
  abstract_min = 0.7   # minimum ratio considered abstract
  concrete_max = 0.3   # maximum ratio considered concrete

  [evaluation.cohesion]
  high_gt = 1.0        # values greater than this are high cohesion

  [evaluation.instability]
  unstable_min = 0.7   # minimum ratio considered unstable
  stable_max = 0.3     # maximum ratio considered stable

  [evaluation.distance]
  good_max = 0.4       # max normalized distance considered good
  bad_min = 0.6        # min normalized distance considered bad
```

Specify a path with `-c <FILE>` to use a different configuration, or omit the option to rely on these defaults.

## Docker image

### Using the official image

A pre-built container is available on Docker Hub. Replace `<version>` with the
desired tag and mount your workspace into `/work`:

```bash
docker run --rm -v $(pwd):/work cutsea110/cargo-anatomy:<version> [ARGS...]
```

Any arguments after the image name are forwarded to `cargo-anatomy`. The image
includes the toolchain `cargo` binary and sets the `CARGO` environment variable
to that path, so `cargo metadata` works without `rustup`.

### Building an image (for developers)

Build an image for the current architecture and load it into Docker with:

```bash
docker buildx build --platform <arch> -t cargo-anatomy --load .
```

Replace `<arch>` with `linux/amd64` on x86_64 machines or `linux/arm64` on
Arm-based hosts. To publish a multi-platform image, use `--push` instead of
`--load`:

```bash
docker buildx build --platform linux/amd64,linux/arm64 \
    -t <your-registry>/cargo-anatomy:<version> --push .
```
Set `<version>` to the tag for the published image. After building or pulling an
image, run it as shown above. The runtime uses a distroless base for a smaller
footprint.


## GitHub Actions

You can integrate `cargo-anatomy` in your CI pipeline. The example below installs
`cargo-anatomy` and fails the job when metrics do not satisfy the configured thresholds.
Make sure a `.anatomy.toml` file is present in your repository so the workflow
can load your evaluation settings. You can generate a template with
`cargo anatomy init` and commit it to version control.

```yaml
# .github/workflows/anatomy.yml
name: cargo-anatomy

on:
  push:
    branches: [ main ]
  pull_request:

jobs:
  analyze:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v3
      - uses: actions/setup-rust@v1
        with:
          rust-version: stable
      - name: Install cargo-anatomy
        run: cargo install cargo-anatomy
      - name: Run cargo-anatomy
        run: cargo anatomy -c .anatomy.toml --h-lt 1.1 --d-prime-ge 0.9
```

Commit message:

fix: clarify workspace requirement for manifest path

README.md, after:

# cargo-anatomy
<p align="center">
  <!-- crates.io cannot resolve relative paths for images, so we use an absolute URL (FQDN) -->
  <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cutsea110/cargo-anatomy/main/logo.svg" alt="Cargo Anatomy Logo" width="200" />
</p>

[![Rust CI](https://github.com/cutsea110/cargo-anatomy/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/cutsea110/cargo-anatomy/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
[![Crates.io](https://img.shields.io/crates/v/cargo-anatomy.svg)](https://crates.io/crates/cargo-anatomy)
[![Crates.io Downloads](https://img.shields.io/crates/d/cargo-anatomy.svg?label=Crates.io&logo=rust)](https://crates.io/crates/cargo-anatomy)
[![Docker Cloud Build Status](https://img.shields.io/docker/pulls/cutsea110/cargo-anatomy?label=cargo-anatomy&logo=docker)](https://hub.docker.com/repository/docker/cutsea110/cargo-anatomy/general)

`cargo-anatomy` analyzes Rust workspaces and calculates metrics inspired by Robert C. Martin's package metrics. Each crate inside the workspace is treated as a package.

## Installation

```
cargo install cargo-anatomy
```

## Metrics

- **N** — number of classes in the crate (`struct`, `enum`, `trait` and `type` definitions).
- **R** — number of internal class relationships. Each unique reference from one class to another within the same crate counts once.
- **H** — relational cohesion: `H = (R + 1) / N`.
- **Ca** — afferent coupling: the number of external classes that depend on types from this crate.
- **Ce** — efferent coupling: the number of classes in this crate that depend on types from other crates in the workspace.
- **A** — abstraction: ratio of abstract classes (traits) to total classes, `A = abstract_classes / N`.
- **I** — instability: `I = Ce / (Ce + Ca)`.
- **D** — distance from the main sequence: `D = |A + I - 1| / sqrt(2)`.
- **D'** — normalized distance from the main sequence: `D' = |A + I - 1|`.

## Evaluation
Each metric is also mapped to a qualitative label. These labels are assigned using the following thresholds:

- **A (abstraction)**: ≥ 0.7 is `abstract`, ≤ 0.3 is `concrete`, otherwise `mixed`.
- **H (cohesion)**: > 1.0 is `high`, otherwise `low`.
- **I (instability)**: ≥ 0.7 is `unstable`, ≤ 0.3 is `stable`, otherwise `moderate`.
- **D' (normalized distance)**:
  - ≤ 0.4 → `good`.
  - ≥ 0.6 → `useless` if `A + I - 1 ≥ 0`, otherwise `painful`.
  - otherwise `balanced`.
`cargo-anatomy` also reports the list of classes discovered in each crate and detailed dependency graphs when invoked with the `-a` flag.

## Usage

```bash
# Run on the current workspace
cargo anatomy

# Analyze a specific manifest
cargo anatomy --manifest-path path/to/Cargo.toml

# Show detailed class and dependency information
cargo anatomy -a

# Include external dependencies in metrics (may be slower)
cargo anatomy -x

# Use a custom evaluation config generated by `cargo anatomy init` below
cargo anatomy -c config.toml

# Generate a template config file which you can modify and use with `-c`
cargo anatomy init

# Display help with metric descriptions
cargo anatomy -?

# Show version
cargo anatomy -V

# Output in YAML format
cargo anatomy -o yaml
# Output in Graphviz DOT format
cargo anatomy -o dot
# Output in Mermaid format
cargo anatomy -o mermaid

# Fail if metrics violate thresholds (experimental)
cargo anatomy --h-lt 1.1 --d-prime-ge 0.9
```

For custom evaluation thresholds, run `cargo anatomy init` to generate a
template configuration and pass `-c <FILE>` to load it. See the [Configuration](#configuration) section for more details.

The command outputs metrics for every member crate in compact JSON format by default. Use `-x` to also analyze external dependencies. Analyzing external crates can significantly increase processing time. When the `-a` flag is used, each crate also includes a `details.kind` field indicating whether it is part of the workspace or an external crate. Pipe to `jq` if you want it pretty printed. Use `-o yaml` for YAML output, `-o dot` for Graphviz or `-o mermaid` for Mermaid diagrams. When using `-o dot`, you can write the graph to a file and convert it with Graphviz: `cargo anatomy -o dot > graph.dot && dot -Tpng graph.dot -o graph.png`. Dependency arrows are labeled with the efferent couple count from the source crate when the `-a` flag is used. Graphviz and Mermaid diagrams can include individual type nodes when `--show-types-crates=<CRATE1,CRATE2>` is specified. Mermaid will only render the first 500 edges by default, so increase `maxEdges` in your [Mermaid configuration](https://mermaid.js.org/config/schema-docs/config.html#maxedges) if your graph is larger. Both Graphviz and Mermaid outputs omit dependency edges unless `-a` is supplied, so combining these formats with `-a` is recommended when you want to visualize the graph.
Use `--show-types-crates-all` to expand all workspace crates with type details (experimental).

### Analyzing macro-generated code

`cargo-anatomy` only sees the code that exists in your source files. Dependencies
introduced by macros are not visible unless you expand them first. You can use
[`cargo expand`](https://github.com/dtolnay/cargo-expand) to generate expanded
sources and analyze those instead.

```bash
# Install cargo-expand if you don't have it
cargo install cargo-expand

# Produce expanded sources for a crate
cargo expand -p my_crate --lib > /tmp/my_crate/src/lib.rs
cp my_crate/Cargo.toml /tmp/my_crate/
# If the crate inherits dependencies from the workspace, also copy the workspace root
# Cargo.toml or replace `workspace = true` entries with explicit versions.

# Run cargo-anatomy on the expanded copy
cargo anatomy --manifest-path /tmp/my_crate/Cargo.toml
```

Repeat these steps for any crates that rely heavily on macros to ensure
macro-generated types are included in the analysis.

If the copied manifest contains dependencies like `anyhow = { workspace = true }`,
ensure the workspace root `Cargo.toml` is copied alongside or replace those
entries with concrete versions; otherwise `cargo metadata` will report
"failed to find a workspace root".


See [docs/output-schema.md](https://github.com/cutsea110/cargo-anatomy/blob/main/docs/output-schema.md) for a description of the output schema. Example output (`| jq`):

```json
{
  "meta": {
  "cargo-anatomy": { "version": "0.6.0", "target": "linux/x86_64" },
    "config": {
      "evaluation": {
        "abstraction": { "abstract_min": 0.7, "concrete_max": 0.3 },
        "cohesion": { "high_gt": 1.0 },
        "instability": { "unstable_min": 0.7, "stable_max": 0.3 },
        "distance": { "good_max": 0.4, "bad_min": 0.6 }
      }
    }
  },
  "crates": [
    {
      "crate_name": "my_crate",
      "metrics": {
        "n": 3,
        "r": 1,
        "h": 0.67,
        "ca": 0,
        "ce": 1,
        "a": 0.33,
        "i": 1.0,
        "d": 0.24,
        "d_prime": 0.34
      },
      "evaluation": {
        "a": "mixed",
        "h": "low",
        "i": "unstable",
        "d_prime": "good"
      },
      "details": {
        "kind": "Workspace",
        "classes": [
          { "name": "Foo", "kind": "Struct" },
          { "name": "Bar", "kind": "Struct" },
          { "name": "MyTrait", "kind": "Trait" }
        ]
      }
    }
  ],
  "warnings": {
    "dependency_cycles": []
  }
}
```

Enable `RUST_LOG=info` to see progress logs during analysis.

## Configuration

`cargo-anatomy` looks for a `.anatomy.toml` file at the workspace root to customize how metric values are evaluated. Run `cargo anatomy init` to create a template `.anatomy.toml` in the current directory. Pass `-c <FILE>` to use a different configuration. The file is written in TOML and contains the following sections and defaults:

```toml
[evaluation]
  [evaluation.abstraction]
  abstract_min = 0.7   # minimum ratio considered abstract
  concrete_max = 0.3   # maximum ratio considered concrete

  [evaluation.cohesion]
  high_gt = 1.0        # values greater than this are high cohesion

  [evaluation.instability]
  unstable_min = 0.7   # minimum ratio considered unstable
  stable_max = 0.3     # maximum ratio considered stable

  [evaluation.distance]
  good_max = 0.4       # max normalized distance considered good
  bad_min = 0.6        # min normalized distance considered bad
```

Specify a path with `-c <FILE>` to use a different configuration, or omit the option to rely on these defaults.

## Docker image

### Using the official image

A pre-built container is available on Docker Hub. Replace `<version>` with the
desired tag and mount your workspace into `/work`:

```bash
docker run --rm -v $(pwd):/work cutsea110/cargo-anatomy:<version> [ARGS...]
```

Any arguments after the image name are forwarded to `cargo-anatomy`. The image
includes the toolchain `cargo` binary and sets the `CARGO` environment variable
to that path, so `cargo metadata` works without `rustup`.

### Building an image (for developers)

Build an image for the current architecture and load it into Docker with:

```bash
docker buildx build --platform <arch> -t cargo-anatomy --load .
```

Replace `<arch>` with `linux/amd64` on x86_64 machines or `linux/arm64` on
Arm-based hosts. To publish a multi-platform image, use `--push` instead of
`--load`:

```bash
docker buildx build --platform linux/amd64,linux/arm64 \
    -t <your-registry>/cargo-anatomy:<version> --push .
```
Set `<version>` to the tag for the published image. After building or pulling an
image, run it as shown above. The runtime uses a distroless base for a smaller
footprint.


## GitHub Actions

You can integrate `cargo-anatomy` in your CI pipeline. The example below installs
`cargo-anatomy` and fails the job when metrics do not satisfy the configured thresholds.
Make sure a `.anatomy.toml` file is present in your repository so the workflow
can load your evaluation settings. You can generate a template with
`cargo anatomy init` and commit it to version control.

```yaml
# .github/workflows/anatomy.yml
name: cargo-anatomy

on:
  push:
    branches: [ main ]
  pull_request:

jobs:
  analyze:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v3
      - uses: actions/setup-rust@v1
        with:
          rust-version: stable
      - name: Install cargo-anatomy
        run: cargo install cargo-anatomy
      - name: Run cargo-anatomy
        run: cargo anatomy -c .anatomy.toml --h-lt 1.1 --d-prime-ge 0.9
```
